You don't know it's a science fiction here. You're well trapped. Because it's
not packaged as science fiction, which didn't matter to me. Deliberate. You can
tape it if you want.
Rebel in Time was a definite attempt between myself and the publisher. I had the
idea. I saw the idea as being something that a non-science fiction reader would
buy. Science fiction sells 20% of all fiction in the United States in paperback,
which is not bad. But being a writer, I see 80% more I could sell. And a
publisher like to sell more, too. So we talked about the novel. I said it's pure
science fiction, but it starts out as a mystery novel. And it's a good quarter
of the way into it before the science fiction element is brought in. And it's a
science fiction element that the reader will accept, any general reader. And by
that time, he's trapped. And I think, if you think you can sell as a mainstream
novel, let's try it. And I turned the manuscript in England, America, and I
said, yes, we're going to try and sell this to everybody. And 10, 20 years ago,
I couldn't have done that because I had no big name, and the readers would not
have bought it. Now, I have enough readers around. They'll see it, my name on
it. They'll look at it, open it, maybe buy it. The science fiction readers. So I
don't think we'll lose one science fiction reader by packaging it that way. We
might pick up a lot of other readers, which make me happy, my publisher happy,
my wife happy, my children, my bank manager, you know, all the things we want to
make happy.
Okay. We've talked a bit about your novels, but we haven't mentioned short
stories. And you've written one or two of those. How do you attack a short story
as opposed to a novel? How do they occur to you? In science fiction, unlike a
lot of other fiction, there are people who write both short stories and novels.
Some of them can, but a lot of them can. And very simply, it is least residual.
A short story is a one-idea story. If a single gimmick or device or turn of
plot, you write that to length and stop it at two or three or four or five
thousand words. If it's complicated, it goes to 10,000 novelettes. As opposed to
a novel, which is a complex thought that requires modifications, more than one
idea, ramifications, and then it goes to novel length. And many times I first
started writing, I had some short story ideas. And they're very good to do. They
go in the magazines, they go in anthologies, read, recognize your name. And
deliberately, between novels, we do a half dozen short stories. Unhappily, after
a number of years of writing, you find publishers want to give you more money
for novels. And they really do. The word rate per word in a novel is about 10
times a short story. And I find myself tending to cook one novel onto the end of
the other. I haven't written a short story in three or four or five years, which
I think is a shame because I have four collections of short stories out, all
selling quite nicely, and they've anthologized in about 22 languages. But in the
history of time, I found a time in life I wanted to anthologize, and I did. A
time in life I wanted to write short stories, I did. Now I'm tending to write
longer and longer books, like Rebel in Time, the current book, which will be
about a quarter of a million words at least, perhaps longer. Not because I want
to write a long book, because a very complex idea requires that amount of time
to work out. And there again, it's right as lives go in the waves like the
ocean. You surge up the beach, a lot of dead things in it, and go away out to
the ocean again, the clear depths, and you produce different things at different
times. If you could write anything you want, not worrying about economic
exigencies, would you stick to short stories? Would they mean that much to you?
I'm happy to say that for the last 20-odd years, I've never written a thing I
didn't want to write. I've turned down assignments I didn't enjoy, and I've
written just exactly the books and short stories I wanted to write. It's a nice
position to be in, too. I read the books that you've signed so far, the
collections. I think I have all the collections, so I read all those collected
short stories plus some insinorologies, and Rescue Operation Far and Away was my
favorite. Really? That's unusual here. Yes, Rescue Operation. There again, I see
one idea. That Rescue Operation came out. Everything in there I know except the
alien. In Yugoslavia, the most broken-down country in Western Europe, they have
peasants there, which are much more broken-down than German peasants. They have
deeply religious, simple-mindedly stupid people-burning peasants within 10 miles
of a nuclear reactor. The perfect analog of our world. Instead of northern
civilized countries, southern poor, uncivilized countries all in one country,
and having been in the middle of this and having had a number of desperately
awful things happen to me and my family down there. The children got scarlet
fever, had had injections with blunt needles, had to carry them screaming, you
know, sort of thing. And I was living in that desperate, awful world, and there
again, the background was there. And then the thought, whew, instead of arriving
in Central Park in front of the White House, what if the alien from space
arrived there? Voila, you know, complete. Just a matter of writing it. I was
also very moved by the one, I'm terrible in the names and titles, the one where
you said you got the idea when you were in Europe and wherever you were you
heard that Martin Luther King had been shot and somebody said he was just in the
middle. That's right. Not me, not Amos Cabot. No, that's not the level thing.
I'll come again. That's not a short story. Yeah, Mute Milton. Mute Milton. Yeah.
Living in Scandinavia, been out of the States two or three or four years and the
Danes are absolutely colorblind that in fact in those days really certain kind
of girls only date black men. Other girls used to look down upon them. There
were about four black men in the whole country, you know. And you know, it's
very easy to be pro-race, anti-racist if you're in a country with no race
problems. But living there, children growing up there, and Martin Luther King
was shot and a newspaper called me and asked me what my opinion on it, you know,
and we're all horrified. And then I picked a copy of Newsweek up and they had
some great big belly Alabama. I photographed him with a shotgun in one hand, a
nose picker in the other, and his belly hangover is his belt, you know, saying,
well, just one more nigger to me. And I just, my white heat engulfed my mind.
One of Americans, he got a Nobel Prize earlier than that. You know, one of
Americans, well, I was very proud when he came over there. I was in Scandinavia,
he's an American getting a prize for doing something really good in the world,
being honored for it. And I saw red and the idea came to me, you know, for the
story and just, again, to put into a story that rage I had, that strong feeling.
And if I write, I can do that, well, then you're that unsuccessful story.
The thing that came to mind, you were, you described the device that he had
had concocted and there's a lot of detail in that.
Reminds me of other in your own knowledge.
You have a lot of engineering and physics and mechanics and that sort of thing.
That's not in your background per se, but you must have an interest in it to put it.
Yeah.
Well, my background superficially looks like it's all in the arts.
But in reality, my early training was as a mechanic and a computer engineer
began all in the military for some reason, best known to myself.
I have a very high mechanical aptitude.
The army had a test for this and the maximum 160, I did 156.
So they ramble, they threw me into a school, the northern bombsite, the old
northern bombsite, the mystery of the war.
And it works on that and the computing gun sites right next to it.
And I could do it and I enjoyed it.
And I spent the whole war working on these things and driving a truck
and teaching people to shoot, you know. And so my background
there is in mechanics. I can know there's mechanics. And I did major in biology
in school before I went in. And I keep my reading up. That's all. I mean, a
science fiction writer shouldn't, you know, be a jackdaw of science. You should
know enough about any science to read an article on it and know what they're
talking about, what I do. The nice part is that among science fiction readers
there's so many closet readers who have other jobs. Every engineer in the world
in every school used to be a science fiction fan. Professors of this biology,
linguistics. And they love this stuff. And I have a problem. I just grabbed some
professor. A doctor teaching physics said, tell me about that. They'll sit down
because you know yourself. Any engineer, all he wants to do is talk about a
speciality over and over and over again. I love to hear about it. And I pin
these guys down. I know enough about the basics of mechanics and biology and
nuclear theory to understand what they're talking about. And for a while, I'm an
authority on it. I did Skyfall. I had a science fiction fan in England who was
an upper atmosphere specialist. I was about three in the world at the time. A
typical British program sending British packages up in American rockets from
Norway, you know, into the upper atmosphere. And for one while there, I had
charts. I understood all about orbital mechanics. I know everything about it for
one glorious month or two. I did that chapter. It's all gone now. And again, to
answer the question, I know the areas I don't know and I know enough to ask
somebody and I know enough to get it right and have them check it out. You
really should do your sums in science fiction. Get your facts right and then
work around them. Known facts should be right and make up your own facts
afterwards. Skyfall was almost prophetic, wasn't it? Not almost. Skyfall was
prophetic.
Yeah, now twice. Skyfall was prophetic in the sense that there again, from the
literature, I discovered that the Russians and the Americans were lying to the
world. These great big boosters did not burn upon re-entry. They just flashed
down the ocean and what they were doing was relying upon the law of averages.
Three quarters of the world is water, right? 98% of the land is desert or
mountain, right? So the chances are you're never going to drop it on somebody.
Oh yeah, I said. This friend in the rocket program showed me Radio Sun rocket
they sent up with, you know, that instrumentation in the nose was supposed to do
important things in the upper atmosphere and it had failed. It went up 150
miles, turned over under full blast and blasted down at full speed into the
ground. Dusted off, it's still working. You know, so no, they don't burn up in
the atmosphere and I said, one of these days they're going to drop one of these
things in the wrong place and they're big and they weigh tons and tons and tons
and we're being lied to. And so then again, that's a plot and I worked on a plot
where you're dropping on something big and what do you know, a little bit later
and the interesting part was, doubly prophetic in that at this point we didn't
know the upper atmosphere very much and Professor Webb was telling me that he
said, gee, you know, we just discovered the upper atmosphere is so tenuous that
when a photon storm, the solar flare large one hits the upper atmosphere it can
move up a matter of 50, 80 miles in a matter of minutes because it's so, as the
heat enters these molecules they expand, up it goes and, wow, I said, plot
device, I needed a way of stopping my orbiting ship to get it down in one spot.
Solar storm, it goes around the back of the earth comes out like hitting a wall
and falls. Guess why Skylab came down? They put Skylab in an orbit they did not
know this happened, it came down for just that reason and I plucked out of this
guy's mind. That's fun to do, let me tell you. I'll ask you two more questions
then. One of them, it just occurred to me, what, what, what's it like to raise a
family, marry, raise a family, be a science fiction writer. What, what does your
wife and family have to put up with? Well, you really should ask my wife, you
really should ask my wife that. It's, it's never boring. Yeah, I'll be honest.
All right? That's all I'm trying to say.
Writers are a pretty dim lot to begin with. They, and I know a lot of them.
They're, they're people eaters, they're cantankerous. What they do, they really,
uh, want her right and do nothing else. And women don't really like them. They,
they, they change a lot of wives. Not because the women can't put up this
nonsense. And the ones that stay married because they marry a woman who is nice
enough or smart enough or commodious enough to entertain their style of life to
permit them to do this sort of thing and put up all their nonsense. I'm happy to
say my dear wife doesn't mind moving to Mexico with a one-year-old baby and
living in a small town with fleas and giving the kid malaria. She doesn't mind
going to Denmark or England or Italy. Um, and it, um, that's just the way it
works. The writing's not going to change. Uh, it's really up to the wife to put
up with the nonsense and the kids, kids grow up in any conditions. Kids think
whatever they have is normal. So that, they're not a problem at all as long as
you think about them. I think it took a joke for a lot of good. It's like,
automatically learned a lot of language. They thought it was normal to speak
more than normal and go to different schools. And then they had to get back to
the States because they knew people who were American and they lived it and knew
what it meant. So we tried it out. And one decided to remain European and the
other decided to remain American and they bought that. I guess I should ask why
the movement around, if that's a fair question, I don't know. What is it that
Nichols' encyclopedia says you're... Peripatetic? Yes, that's the word. Good
word. I want to edit it. I looked it up. Yeah, you looked it up. Yeah. I had to
look it up. Yeah, one editor, um, we should know how you increase your
vocabulary, you know, that's why I love to read Graham Greene. And Anthony
Burgess, you look up words. Kingsley Amis. Kingsley Amis, one book that said,
uh, this is back in the 50s and it must have been a Studebaker. He said, out in
the street in New York, I saw a rather amphibionic car. Amphibionic car? What
the hell is that? It means a creature with a face on both ends. There are
certain worms that look like a face on both ends. Amphib, physiognomy, bionium.
So great. Now, that's how you increase your vocabulary. But, uh, yeah,
parapateticism, some are born parapatetic, some attain parapateticism, some have
it thrust upon them. Not bad, you can't do it every day of the week. I think,
um, I fall into all three categories. I couldn't work in New York. I'd been in
Mexico a few times, a station in the border in the war. I liked it very, very
much. I liked the whole way of life. And I went to Mexico and we lived there for
a year and then couldn't, it was just too boring and too simple and nothing much
going on with the family. And then I wanted to go to England. And once you start
moving, you find it's much easier to keep going. And the answer basically is,
like when you ask someone, someone asks me, why I raise a beard. I ask them, why
they shave theirs off? And is it, why are you living in Texas? And if you're,
you're always in Texas, but why aren't you living in England? when I, I never
seen a place that I didn't want to visit. And I find it's utterly fascinating to
learn about cultures. I think, I told, um, a number of times that different
science fiction writers, if you're writing about other cultures, shouldn't you
see a little bit more than your own culture? Shouldn't you get around? And, um,
I find it utterly fascinating to go into a new culture, meet a new kind of life,
to speak a new language, and see how people work. And I think it must be
reflected in my work.
Well, you'd also said, honey, you couldn't write about the future without your present.
I mean, you don't get the past and you don't want to spend.
Because you're talking about the future.
It's different.
Well, you answered my question while I was going to ask you.
Your first Star Wars, the home world was in England and Star Wars was in the States.
Very, very, very definitely, very definitely playing.
You're not like champ.
I mean, obviously when you look at it, you know, but people don't really look at the
unalien. So it's accepted. It's kept the whole good stuff.
Exactly.
Okay.
At the end of the, we want to wind one up.
You want to wind another question, wind it up?
Or are we, how are we doing?
Question to wind it up.
Okay.
A real lightweight question.
How do you want to
be remembered? I'm after, like John Campbell, you say, staying alive forever.
No, no, uh, how do you want to be remembered? I don't want to be remembered, I
want to be here. That's a very simple answer. oh, writing is a very satisfying
craft. When you do it, you're satisfied. What you're doing, if you're doing it
well. But then, uh, it's not like, I don't really believe that real writers
write in closets for them, their own pleasure. Then, you're, it's a
communication. It's like talking in sex. You're, it's interrelationship going
all the time. Then after having done to best your ability something, you want to
publish it and see if anybody knows what the hell you said. And that's
interesting. See if you succeeded in what you were trying to do. See, as an
artist, I was always doing artwork and getting it out there. So I'm used to
having a feedback public. And, uh, then again, if you would all feel about the
state of the world, the writer is a very privileged state, the science fiction
writer, he can give lectures and he can tell people what to do and he can warn
them, you know, in a very hectoring tone of voice. And, uh, if you can do all
those things, it's a satisfactory way of getting from A to B, you know, a lot
more satisfactory than working at McDonald's. That's so much. How can we top
that?